CHAPTER LXV

In which an Account is given who the Knight of the White Moon was, with the Liberty of Don Gregorio, and other Accidents.
 

Don Antonio Moreno followed the Knight of the White Moon. A great number of boys also pursued and persecuted him, till they had lodged him at an inn within the city. Don Antonio went in after him, being desirous to know who he was. His squire came out to receive and unarm him. He shut himself up in a lower room, and with him Don Antonio, whose cake was dough till he knew who he was. He of the White Moon, perceiving that this gentleman would not leave him, said: "I very well know, Sir, the design of your coming, which is to learn who I am; and, because there is no occasion for concealing it, while my servant is unarming me, I will inform you, without deviating a tittle from the truth. Know, Sir, that I am called the Bachelor Sampson Carrasco: I am of the same town with Don Quixote de la Mancha, whose madness and folly move all that know him to compassion. Of those who had most pity for him, was I; and, believing his recovery to depend upon his being quiet, and staying at home in his own house, I contrived how to make him continue there. And so, about three months ago, I sallied forth to the highway like a knight-errant, styling myself Knight of the Looking-glasses, designing to fight with him, and vanquish him, without doing him harm, the condition of our combat being that the vanquished should remain at the discretion of the vanquisher; and what I, concluding him already vanquished, intended to enjoin him, was that he should return to his village, and not stir out of it in a whole year; in which time he might be cured. But fortune ordained it otherwise; for he vanquished me, and tumbled me from my horse, and so my design did not take effect. He pursued his journey, and I returned home, vanquished, ashamed, and bruised with the fall, which was a very dangerous one. Nevertheless I lost not the desire of finding him, and vanquishing him, as you have seen this day. And, as he is so exact and punctual in observing the laws of knight-errantry, he will doubtless keep that I have laid upon him, and will be as good as his word. This, Sir, is the business; and I have nothing to add, but only to entreat you not to discover me, nor to let Don Quixote know who I am, that my good intentions may take effect, and his understanding be restored to a man, who has a very good one, if the follies of the follies of chivalry do but leave him." — "Oh! Sir," replied Don Antonio, "God forgive you the injury you have done the whole world in endeavouring to restore to his senses the most diverting madman in it. Do you not see, Sir, that the benefit of his recovery will not counterbalance the pleasure his extravagances afford? But, I fancy, that all Signor Bachelor's industry will not be sufficient to recover a man so consummately mad; and were it not against the rule of charity, I would say, may Don Quixote never be recovered; for by his cure, we not only lose his pleasantries, but those of his squire Sancho Panza too; any one of which is enough to make Melancholy herself merry. Nevertheless I will hold my peace, and tell him nothing, to try if I am right in suspecting that all Signor Carrasco's diligence is likely to be fruitless." Carrasco answered, "that all things considered, the business was in a promising way, and he hoped for good success." Don Antonio, having offered his service in whatever else he pleased to command him, took his leave. The same day, the -[576]- bachelor, having caused his armour to be tied upon the back of a mule, rode out of the city upon the same horse, on which he entered the fight, and returned to his native place, nothing befalling him by the way worthy to be recorded in this faithful history. Don Antonio recounted to the viceroy all that Carrasco had told him; at which the viceroy was not much pleased, considering that Don Quixote's confinement would put an end to all that diversion which his follies administered to those that knew him.

Six days Don Quixote lay in bed, chagrined, melancholy, thoughtful, and peevish, his imagination still dwelling upon the unhappy business of his defeat. Sancho strove to comfort him, and, among other things, said: "Dear Sir, hold up your head, and be cheerful if you can, and give Heaven thanks, that though you got a swinging fall, you did not come off with a rib broken; and since you know that they who will give must take, and that there are not always bacon-flitches where there are pins, cry, 'A fig for the physician,' since you have no need of his help in this distemper. Let us return home, and leave this rambling in quest of adventures through countries and places unknown; and if it be well considered, I am the greater loser, though your worship be the greater sufferer. I, who with the government, quitted the desire of ever governing more, did not quit the desire of being an earl, which will never come to pass, if your worship refuses being a king, by quitting the exercise of chivalry; and so my hopes vanish into smoke." — "Peace, Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "since you see my confinement and retirement is not to last above a year, and then I will resume my honourable profession, and shall not want a kingdom to win for myself, nor an earldom to bestow on you." — "God hear it," quoth Sancho, "and let sin be deaf; for I have always been told that a good expectation is better than a bad possession."

They were thus discoursing, when Don Antonio entered with signs of great joy, saying: "My reward, Signor Don Quixote, for the good news I bring; Don Gregorio, and the renegado who went to bring him, are in the harbour — in the harbour, do I say? By this time they must be come to the viceroy's palace, and will be here presently." Don Quixote was a little revived, and said: "In truth, I was going to say, I should be glad if it had fallen out quite otherwise, that I might have been obliged to go over to Barbary, where, by the force of my arm, I should have given liberty, not only to Don Gregorio, but to all the Christian captives that are in Barbary. But what do I say, wretch that I am? Am I not he who is vanquished? Am I not he who is overthrown? Am I not he who has it not in his power to take arms in a twelvemonth? Why then do I promise? Why do I vaunt, if I am fitter to handle a distaff than a sword?" — "No more, Sir," quoth Sancho: "let the hen live, though she have the pip. To-day for you, and to-morrow for me; and, as for these matters of encounters and bangs, never trouble your head about them; for he that falls to-day may rise to-morrow, unless he has a mind to lie a-bed; I mean, by giving way to despondency, and not endeavouring to recover fresh spirits for fresh encounters. And pray, Sir, rise and welcome Don Gregorio; for there seems to be a great bustle in the house, and by this time he is come."

He said the truth; for Don Gregorio and the renegado having given the viceroy an account of the expedition, Don Gregorio, impatient to see Anna Felix, was come with the renegado to Don Antonio's house; and though Don Gregorio, when he made his escape from Algiers, was in a woman's dress, he had exchanged it in the barque for that of a captive, who -[577]- escaped with him. But in whatever dress he had come, he would have had the appearance of a person worthy to be loved, served, and esteemed; for he was above measure beautiful, and seemed to be about seventeen or eighteen years of age. Ricote and his daughter went out to meet him, the father with tears, and the daughter with modesty. The young couple did not embrace each other; for where there is much love, there are usually but few freedoms. The joint beauties of Don Gregorio and Anna Felix surprised all the beholders. Silence spoke for the two lovers, and their eyes were the tongues that proclaimed their joyful and modest sentiments.. The renegado acquainted the company with the artifices and means he had employed to bring off Don Gregorio. Don Gregorio recounted the dangers and straits he was reduced to among the women he remained with, not in a tedious discourse, but in few words, by which he showed that his discretion outstripped his years. In short, Ricote generously paid and satisfied, as well the renegado as those that rowed at the oar. The renegado was reconciled and restored to the bosom of the Church, and of a rotten member, became clean and sound through penance and repentance.

Two days after the viceroy and Don Antonio consulted together about the means how Anna Felix and her father might remain in Spain, thinking it no manner of inconvenience that a daughter so much a Christian, and a father to appearance so well inclined, should continue in the kingdom. Don Antonio offered to solicit the affair himself at court, being obliged to go thither about other business; intimating that by means of favour and bribery, many difficult matters are there brought about. "No," said Ricote, who was present at this discourse, "there is nothing to be expected from favour or bribes; for which the great Bernardino de Velasco, Count of Salazar, to whom his Majesty has given the charge of our expulsion, no entreaties, no promises, no bribes, no pity are of any avail; for though it is true he tempers justice with mercy, yet, because he sees the whole body of our nation tainted and putrefied, he rather makes use of burning caustics, than mollifying ointments; so that by prudence, by sagacity, by diligence, by terrors, he has supported on his able shoulders the weight of this great machine, and brought it to due execution and perfection: our artifices, stratagems, diligence, and policies not being able to blind his Argus' eyes, continually open to see that none of us stay or lurk behind, that like a concealed root, may hereafter spring up, and spread venomous fruit through Spain, already cleared, already freed from the fears our vast numbers kept the kingdom in. A most heroic resolution of the great Philip the Third, and unheard-of wisdom in committing this charge to the said Don Bernardino de Velasco!" — "However, when I am at court," said Don Antonio, "I will use all the diligence and means possible, and leave the success to Heaven. Don Gregorio shall go with me, to comfort his parents under the affliction they must be in for his absence: Anna Felix shall stay at my house with my wife, or in a monastery; and I am sure the viceroy will be glad that honest Ricote remain in his house till he sees the success of my negotiation." The viceroy consented to all that was proposed. But Don Gregorio, knowing what passed, expressed great unwillingness to leave Anna Felix; but resolving to visit his parents, and to concert the means of returning for her, he came at length into the proposal. Anna Felix remained with Don Antonio's lady, and Ricote in the viceroy's house. The day of Don Antonio's departure came, and that of Don Quixote's -[578]- and Sancho's two days after, his fall not permitting him to travel sooner. At Don Gregorio's parting from Anna Felix, all was tears, sighs, swoonings and sobbings. Ricote offered Don Gregorio a thousand crowns, if he desired them; but he would accept only of five, that Don Antonio lent him to be repaid when they met at court. With this they both departed; and Don Quixote and Sancho afterwards, as has been said; Don Quixote unarmed, and in a travelling dress, and Sancho on foot, because Dapple was loaded with the armour.

 