CHAPTER LXVII

Of the Resolution Don Quixote took to turn Shepherd, and lead a rural Life, till the Year of his Promise should be expired; with other Accidents truly pleasant and good.
 

If various cogitations perplexed Don Quixote before his defeat, many more tormented him after his overthrow. He stayed, as has been said, under the shade of a tree, where reflections, like flies about honey, assaulted and stung him; some dwelling upon the disenchantment of Dulcinea, and others upon the life he was to lead in his forced retirement. Sancho came up, and commended to him the generosity of the lackey Tosilos. "Is it possible, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that you persist in thinking that he is a real lackey? You seem to have quite forgotten that you saw Dulcinea converted and transformed into a country wench, and the Knight of the Looking-glasses into the Bachelor Sampson Carrasco: all the work of enchanters who persecute me. But tell me, did you inquire of this Tosilos, what God has done with Altisidora; whether she still bewails my absence, or has already left in the hands of oblivion the amorous thoughts that tormented her whilst I was present?" — "Mine," answered Sancho, "were not of a kind to afford me leisure to inquire after fooleries: body of me, Sir, is your worship now in a condition to be inquiring after other folk's thoughts, especially amorous ones?" — "Look you, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "there is a great deal of difference between what is done out of love, and what out of gratitude: it is very possible a gentleman may not be in love; but it is impossible, strictly speaking, he should be ungrateful. Altisidora to all appearance loved me: she gave me three nightcaps you know of; she wept at my departure; she cursed me, vilified me, and in spite of shame, complained publicly of me; all signs that she adored me; for the anger of lovers usually ends in maledictions. I had neither hopes to give her, nor treasures to offer her; for mine are all engaged to Dulcinea, and the treasures of knights-errant, like those of fairies, are delusions, not realities, and I can only give her these remembrances I have of her, without prejudice however to those I have of Dulcinea, whom you wrong through your remissness in whipping yourself, and in disciplining that flesh of yours (may I see it devoured by wolves!), which had rather preserve itself for the worms, than for the relief of that poor lady." — "Sir," answered Sancho, "if I must speak the truth, I cannot -[582]- persuade myself that the lashing of my posteriors can have anything to do with disenchanting the enchanted; for it is as if one should say, 'If you: head aches, anoint your kneepans.' At least I dare swear, that in all the histories your worship has read, treating of knight-errantry, you never met with anybody disenchanted by whipping. But be that as it will, I will lay it on, when the humour takes me, and time gives me conveniency of chastising myself." — "God grant it," answered Don Quixote, "and Heaven give you grace to see the duty and obligation you are under to aid my lady, who is yours too, since you are mine."

With these discourses they went on their way, when they arrived at the very place and spot, where they had been trampled upon by the bulls. Don Quixote knew it again, and said to Sancho. "This is the meadow where we lighted on the gay shepherdesses and gallant shepherds, who intended to revive in it, and imitate, the pastoral Arcadia; a thought, as new as ingenious; in imitation of which, if you approve it, I could wish, O Sancho, we might turn shepherds, at least for the time I must live retired. I will buy sheep, and all other materials necessary for the pastoral employment; and I calling myself the shepherd Quixotiz, and you the shepherd Panzino, we will range the mountains, the woods and meadows, singing here, and complaining there, drinking the liquid crystal of the fountains, of the limpid brooks, or of the mighty rivers. The oaks with a plentiful hand shall give their sweetest fruit; the trunks of the hardest cork-trees shall afford us seats; the willows shall furnish shade, and the roses scent; the spacious meadow shall yield us carpets of a thousand colours; the air, clear and pure, shall supply breath; the moon and stars afford light, in spite of the darkness of the night: singing shall furnish pleasure, and complaining yield delight; Apollo shall provide verses and love conceits; with which we shall make ourselves famous and immortal, not only in the present, but in future ages." — "Before God," quoth Sancho, "this kind of life squares and corners with me exactly. Besides, no sooner will the Bachelor Sampson Carrasco, and Master Nicholas, the barber, have well seen it, but they will have a mind to follow and turn shepherds with us, and God grant that the priest have not an inclination to make one in the fold, he is of so gay a temper, and such a lover of mirth." — "You have said very well," replied Don Quixote;" and the Bachelor Sampson Carrasco, if he enters himself into the pastoral society, as doubtless he will, may call himself the shepherd Sampsonino, or Carrascon. Nicholas the barber may be called Niculoso, as old Boscan called himself Nemoroso.(216) As for the priest, I know not what name to bestow upon him, unless it be some derivative from his profession, calling him the shepherd Curiambro. As for the shepherdesses, whose lovers we are to be, we may pick and choose their names, as we do pears; and since that of my lady quadrates alike with a shepherdess and a princess, I need not trouble myself about seeking another that may suit her better. You, Sancho, may give yours what name you please." — "I do not intend," answered Sancho, "to give mine any other than Teresona, which will fit her fat sides well, and is near her own too, since her name is Teresa. Besides, when I come to celebrate her in verse, I shall discover my chaste desires; for I am not for looking in other folk's houses for better bread than made of wheat. As for the priest, it will not be proper he should have a shepherdess, that he may set a good example; and if the Bachelor Sampson will have one, his soul is at his own disposal." -[583]- "God be my aid!" cried Don Quixote, "what a life shall we lead friend Sancho! what a world of bagpipes shall we hear! what pipes of Zamora! what tambourets! what tabors! and what rebecs! And, if to all these different musics be added the albogues, we shall have almost all the pastoral instruments." — "What are your albogues?" demanded Sancho;" for I never heard them named, nor ever saw one of them in all my life." — "Albogues," answered Don Quixote, "are certain plates of brass like candlesticks, which, being hollow, and struck against each other, give a sound, if not very agreeable, or harmonious, yet not offensive, and agreeing well enough with the rusticity of the tabor and pipe. And this name Albogues is Moorish, as are all those in Spanish, that begin with al; as Almohaza, Almorzar, Alhombra, Alguacil, Aluzema, Almacen, Alcanc?a, and the like, with very few more; and our language has only three Moorish words ending in i, namely Borcegui, Zaquizami and Maravedi; Alhel? and Alfaqui, as well for beginning with al, as ending in i, are known to be Arabic. This I have told you, by-the-by, the occasion of naming albogues having brought it into my mind. One main help, probably, we shall have toward perfecting this profession, is, that I, as you know, am somewhat of a poet, and the Bachelor Sampson Carrasco an extremely good one. Of the priest I say nothing; but I will venture a wager, he has the points and collar of a poet,(217) and that Master Nicholas, the barber, has them too, I make no doubt; for most or all of that faculty are players on the guitar and song-makers. I will complain of absence; you shall extol yourself for a constant lover; the shepherd Carrascon shall lament his being disdained; and the priest Curiambro may say, or sing, whatever will do him most service; and so the business will go on as well as heart can wish."

To which Sancho answered: "I am so unlucky, Sir, that I am afraid I shall never see the day wherein I shall be engaged in this employment. Oh! what neat wooden spoons shall I make, when I am a shepherd! what crumbs! what cream! what garlands! what pastoral gimcracks! which, though they do not procure me the reputation of being wise, will not fail to procure me that of being ingenious. My daughter Sanchica shall bring us our dinner to the sheepfold: but have a care of that; she is a very sightly wench, and shepherds there are who are more of the knave than the fool; and I would not have my girl come for wool, and return back shorn; and your loves, and wanton desires, are as frequent in fields as in the cities, and to be found in shepherds' cottages as well as in kings' palaces; and, take away the occasion, and you take away the sin; and, what the eye views not, the heart rues not: a leap from behind a bush has more force than the prayer of a good man." — "No more proverbs, good Sancho," cried Don Quixote; "for any one of those you have mentioned is sufficient to let us know your meaning. I have often advised you not to be so prodigal of your proverbs, and to keep a strict hand over them; but, it seems, it is preaching in the desert, and the more my mother whips me the more I rend and tear." — "Methinks," answered Sancho, "your worship makes good the saying, the kettle called the pot black-face. You are reproving me for speaking proverbs, and you string them yourself by couples." — "Look you, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "I use mine to the purpose, and, when I speak them, they are as fit as a ring to the finger; but you drag them in by head and shoulders. If I remember right, I have already told you, that proverbs are short sentences drawn from experience and the speculations of our ancient sages; and the proverb that is not to the purpose is rather an -[584]- absurdity than a sentence. But enough of this; and, since night approaches, let us retire a little way out of the high road, where we will pass this night, and God knows what will be to-morrow."

They retired; they supped late and ill, much against Sancho's inclination, who now began to reflect upon the difficulties attending knight-errantry amongst woods and mountains; though now and then plenty showed itself in castles and houses, as at Don Diego de Miranda's, at the wedding of the rich Camacho, and at Don Antonio Moreno's; but he considered it was not possible it should always be day, nor always night; and so he spent the remainder of that sleeping, and his master waking.

 