CHAPTER X

Of the Discourse Don Quixote had with his good Squire Sancho Panza.
 

By this time Sancho Panza had got upon his legs, somewhat roughly handled by the monk's lacqueys, and stood beholding very attentively the combat of his master Don Quixote, and besought God in his heart that he would be pleased to give him the victory, and that he might thereby win some island of which to make him governor as he had promised him. Now seeing the conflict at an end, and that his master was ready to mount again upon Rozinante, he came and held his stirrup; and before he got up he fell upon his knees before him, and taking hold of his hand, kissed it, and said to him: "Be pleased, my Lord Don Quixote, to bestow upon me the government of that island which you have won in this rigorous combat: for be it never so big I find in myself ability sufficient to govern it as well as the best he that had ever governed an island in the world." To which Don Quixote answered: "Consider, brother Sancho, that this adventure and others of this nature, are not adventures of islands, but of cross-ways, in which nothing is to be gotten but a broken head or the loss of an ear. Have patience: for adventures will offer whereby I may not only make thee a governor, but something better. Sancho returned him abundance of thanks, and kissing his hand again, and the skirt of his coat of mail, he helped him to get upon Rozinante, and, himself mounting his ass, began to follow his master; who going off at a round rate, without taking his leave or speaking to those of the coach, entered into a wood that was hard by. -[35]-

Sancho followed him as fast as his beast could trot; but Rozinante made such way, that seeing himself like to be left behind, he was forced to call aloud to his master to stay for him. Don Quixote did so, checking Rozinante by the bridle until his weary squire overtook him; who, as soon as he came near, said to him: "Methinks, Sir, it would not be amiss to retire to some church; for considering in what condition you have left your adversary, it is not improbable they may give notice of the fact to the holy brotherhood, (33) and they may apprehend us: and in faith if they do, before we get out of their clutches we may chance to sweat for it." — "Peace," quoth Don Quixote; "for where have you ever seen or read of a knight-errant's being brought before a court of justice, let him have committed never so many homicides." — "I know nothing of your Omecils," answered Sancho, "nor in my life have I ever concerned myself about them: only this I know, that the holy brotherhood have something to say to those who fight in the fields; and as to this other matter, I intermeddle not in it." — "Set your heart at rest, friend," answered Don Quixote; "for I should deliver you out of the hands of the Chaldeans: how much more out of those of the holy brotherhood? But tell me, on your life, have you ever seen a more valorous knight than I upon the whole face of the known earth? Have you read in story of any other who has or ever had more bravery in assailing, more breath in holding out, more dexterity in wounding, or more address in giving a fall?" — "The truth is," answered Sancho, "that I never read any history at all; for I can neither read nor write: but what I dare affirm is, that I never served a bolder master than your worship in all the days of my life; and pray God we be not called to an account for these darings where I just now said. What I beg of your worship is, that you would let your wound be dressed, for there comes a great deal of blood from that ear: and I have here some lint and a little white ointment in my wallet." — "All this would have been needless," answered Don Quixote, "if I had bethought myself of making a phial of the balsam of Fierabras; for with one single drop of that we might have saved both time and medicines." — "What phial and what balsam is that?" said Sancho Panza. "It is a balsam," answered Don Quixote, of which I have the receipt by heart; and he that has it need not fear death, nor so much as think of dying by any wound. And, therefore, when I shall have made it and given it you, all you will have to do is, when you see me in some battle cleft asunder, as it frequently happens, to take up fair and softly that part of my body which shall fall to the ground, and with the greatest nicety, before the blood is congealed, place it upon the other half that shall remain in the saddle, taking especial care to make them tally exactly. Then must you immediately give me to drink only two draughts of the balsam aforesaid, and then will you see me become sounder than any apple." — "If this be so," said Sancho, "I renounce from henceforward the government of the promised island, and desire no other thing in payment of my many and good services but only that your worship will give me the receipt of this extraordinary liquor; for I dare say it will anywhere fetch more than two reals an ounce, and I want no more to pass this life creditably and comfortably. But I should be glad to know whether it will cost much in the making?" — "For less than three reals one may make nine pints," answered Don Quixote. "Sinner that I am," replied Sancho, "why then does your worship delay to make it and to teach it me? — "Peace, -[36]- friend," answered Don Quixote; "for I intend to teach thee greater secrets, and to do thee greater kindnesses: and for the present let us see about the cure; for my ear pains me more than I could wish."

Sancho took some lint and ointment out of his wallet; but when Don Quixote perceived that his helmet was broken he was ready to run stark mad; and laying his hand on his sword, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, he said: "I swear by the Creator of all things, and by all that is contained in the four holy evangelists, to lead the life that the great Marquis of Mantua led, when he vowed to revenge the death of his nephew Valdovinos; which was, not to eat bread on a table-cloth, nor solace himself with his wife, and other things, which though I do not now remember, I allow here for expressed, until I am fully revenged on him who hath done me this outrage." Sancho hearing this, said to him: "Pray consider, Signor Don Quixote, that if the knight has performed what was enjoined him, namely, to go and present himself before my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, he will then have done his duty, and deserves no new punishment, unless he commits a new crime." — "You have spoken and remarked very justly," answered Don Quixote, "and I annul the oath so far as concerns the taking a fresh revenge; but I make it, and confirm it anew, as to leading the life I have mentioned, until I shall take by force such another helmet, or one as good, from some other knight. And think not, Sancho, I undertake this lightly, or make a smoke of straw: I know what example I follow therein; for the same thing happened exactly with regard to Mambrino's helmet, which cost Sacripante so dear." (34) — "Good Sir," replied Sancho, "give such oaths to the devil; for they are very detrimental to health, and prejudicial to the conscience. Besides, pray tell me, if perchance in many days we should not light upon a man armed with a helmet, what must we do then? must the oath be kept in spite of so many difficulties and inconveniences, such as sleeping in your clothes, and not sleeping in any inhabited place, and a thousand other penances contained in the oath of that mad old fellow the Marquis of Mantua, which you, Sir, would now revive? Consider well, that none of these roads are frequented by armed men, and that here are only carriers and carters who are so far from wearing helmets, that perhaps they never heard them so much as named in all the days of their lives." — "You are mistaken in this," said Don Quixote; "for we shall not be two hours in these cross-ways before we shall see more armed men than came to the siege of Albraca (35) to carry off Angelica the fair." — "Well then, be it so," quoth Sancho; "and God grant us good success, and that we may speedily win this island which costs me so dear; and then no matter how soon I die." — "I have already told you, Sancho, to be in no pain upon that account; for if an island cannot be had, there is the kingdom of Denmark, or that of Sobradisa, (36) which will fit you like a ring to your finger; and, moreover, being upon Terra Firma, (37) you should rejoice the more. But let us leave this to its own time, and see if you have anything for us to eat in your wallet; and we will go presently in quest of some castle where we may lodge this night, and make the balsam that I told you of; for I vow to God my ear pains me very much." — "I have here an onion and a piece of cheese, and I know not how many crusts of bread," said Sancho; "but they are not eatables fit for so valiant a knight as your worship." — "How ill you understand this matter! "answered Don Quixote: "you must know, Sancho, that it is an honour to knights-errant not to -[37]- eat in a month; and if they do eat, it must be of what comes next in hand: and if you had read as many histories as I have done you would have known this: for though I have perused a great many, I never yet found any account given in them that ever knights-errant did eat, unless it were by chance, and at certain sumptuous banquets made on purpose for them; and the rest of their days they lived as it were upon their smelling. And though it is to be presumed they could not subsist without eating and without satisfying all other natural wants, it must likewise be supposed that as they passed most part of their lives in wandering through forests and deserts, and without a cook, their most usual diet must consist of rustic viands, such as those you now offer me. So that, friend Sancho, let not that trouble you which gives me pleasure; nor endeavour to make a new world, or to throw knight-errantry off its hinges." — "Pardon me, Sir," said Sancho; "for as I can neither read nor write, as I told you before, I am entirely unacquainted with the rules of the knightly profession; and from henceforward I will furnish my wallet with all sorts of dried fruits for your worship, who are a knight: and for myself, who am none, I will supply it with poultry and other things of more substance." — "I do not say, Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "that knights-errant are obliged to eat nothing but dried fruit, as you say; but that their most usual sustenance was of that kind, and of certain herbs they found up and down in the fields, which they very well knew; and so do I." — "It is a happiness to know these same herbs," answered Sancho; "for I am inclined to think we shall one day have occasion to make use of that knowledge."

And so saying, he took out what he had provided, and they ate together in a very peaceable and friendly manner. But being desirous to seek out some place to lodge in that night, they soon finished their poor and dry commons. They presently mounted, and made what haste they could to get to some inhabited place before night: but both the sun and their hopes failed them near the huts of certain goatherds; and so they determined to take up their lodging there: but if Sancho was grieved that they could not reach some habitation, his master was as much rejoiced to lie in the open air, making account that every time this befell him he was doing an act possessive, or such an act as gave a fresh evidence of his title to chivalry.
 