CHAPTER XLIX

Of what befell Sancho Panza as he was going the Round of his Island.
 

We left the grand governor moody, and out of humour at the knavish picture-drawn peasant, who, instructed by the steward, and he by the duke, played off Sancho; who, maugre his ignorance, rudeness, and insufficiency, held them all tack, and said to those about him, and to Doctor Pedro Rezio, who, when the secret of the duke's letter was over, came back into the hall: "I now plainly perceive, that judges and governors must or ought to be made of brass, if they would be insensible of the importunities of your men of business, who, being intent upon their own affairs alone, come what will of it, at all hours, and at all times, will needs be heard and despatched; and if the poor judge does not hear and despatch them either because he cannot, or because it is not the proper time for giving them audience, presently they murmur and traduce him, gnawing his very bones, and calumniating him and his family. Foolish man of business, impertinent man of business, be not in such haste; wait for the proper season, and conjuncture for negotiation; come not at dinner-time, nor at bed-time, for judges are made of flesh and blood, and must give to their nature what their nature requires; except only poor I, who do not so by mine, thanks to Signor Pedro Rezio Tirteafuera here present, who would have me die of hunger, and affirms that this kind of dying is in order to live; God grant the same life to him and all those of his tribe; I mean bad physicians; for good ones deserve palms and laurels." All who knew Sancho Panza were in admiration to hear him talk so elegantly, and could not tell what to ascribe it to, unless that offices and weighty employments quicken and enliven some understandings, as they confound and stupefy others. In short, Doctor Pedro Rezio Aguera de Tirteafuera promised he should sup that night, though it were contrary to all the aphorisms of Hippocrates. With this the governor rested satisfied, and expected with great impatience the coming of the night, and the hour of supper; and though time, to his thinking, stood stock still, yet at length the wished-for hour came, and they gave him some cow-beef, hashed with onions and calves feet, somewhat of the stalest, boiled. However, he laid about him with more relish than if they had given him Milan godwits, Roman pheasants, veal of Sorrento, partridges of Morou, geese of Lavajos; and in the midst of supper, turning to the doctor, he said: "Look you, Master Doctor, henceforward take no care to provide me your nice things to eat, nor your tit-bits; for it will be throwing my stomach quite off the hinges, which is accustomed to goat's-flesh, cow-beef, and bacon, with turnips and onions; and if perchance you give it court kickshaws, it receives them with squeamishness, and sometimes with loathing. What Master Sewer here may do, is, to get me some of those eatables you call your olla-podridas, and the stronger they are the better,(200) and you may insert and stuff them in whatever you will; for so it be an eatable, I shall take it kindly, and will one day make you amends; and let nobody play upon me; for either we are, or we are not: let us all live and eat together in peace and good friendship; for when God sends daylight, it is day for everybody. I will govern this island without losing my own right, or taking away another man's; and let everyone keep a good look-out, and mind each man his -[502]- own business; for I would have them to know, the devil is in the wind, and, if they put me upon it, they shall see wonders. Ay, ay, make yourselves honey, and the wasps will devour you." — "Certainly, my lord governor," replied the sewer, "there is reason in all your worship says, and I dare engage, in the name of all the islanders of this island, that they will serve your worship with all punctuality, love, and goodwill; for your sweet way of governing from the very first leaves us no room to do, or to think, anything that may redound to the disservice of your worship." — "I believe it," answered Sancho, "and they would be fools if they did, or thought, otherwise. And I tell you again to take care for my sustenance, and for my Dapple's, which is what is most important in this business; and when the hour comes, we will go the round; for it is my intention to clear this island of all manner of filth, of vagabonds, idlers, and sharpers: for you must understand, friends, that idle and lazy people in a commonwealth are the same as drones in a bee-hive, which eat the honey that the industrious bees lay up in store. My design is, to protect the peasants, preserve to the gentry their privileges, reward ingenious artists, and, above all, to have regard to religion, and to the honour of the religious. What think ye of this, my friends? Do I say something, or do I crack my brain to no purpose?" — "My lord governor," said the steward, "speaks so well, that I wonder to hear a man, so void of learning as your worship, who, I believe, cannot so much as read, say such, and so many things, and all so sententious and instructive, and so far beyond all that could be expected from your worship's former understanding by those who sent us, and by us who are come hither. But every day produces new things; jests turn into earnest, and jokers are joked upon."

The night came, and, the governor having supped, with the license of Signor Doctor Rezio, they prepared for going the round, and he set out with the secretary, the steward, the sewer, and the historiographer, who had the care of recording his actions, together with sergeants and notaries, enough to have formed a middling battalion. In the midst of them marched Sancho, with his white rod of office; and having traversed a few streets, they heard the clashing of swords. They hasted to the place, and found two men fighting; who, seeing the officers coming, desisted, and one of them said, "Help, in the name of God and the king! Is it permitted in this town to rob folks, and set upon them in the streets?" — "Hold, honest man," quoth Sancho, "and tell me what is the occasion of this fray; for I am the governor." The other, his antagonist, said, "My lord governor, I will briefly relate the matter: Your honour must understand, that this gentleman is just come from winning, in that gaming-house yonder over the way, above a thousand reals, and God knows how; and I, being present, gave judgment in his favour, in many a doubtful point, against the dictates of my conscience. Up he got with the winnings, and when I expected he would have given me a crown at least, by way of present, as is the usage and custom among gentlemen of distinction, to such as I am, who stand by, ready at all adventures to back unreasonable demands, and to prevent quarrels, he pocketed up his money, and went out of the house. I followed him in dudgeon, and, with good words and civil expressions, desired him to give me though it were but eight reals, since he knows I am a man of honour, and have neither office nor benefice, my parents having brought me up to nothing, and left me nothing; and this knave, as great a thief as Cacus, and as arrant a sharper as Andradilla, would give me but -[503]- four reals. Judge, my lord governor, how little shame, and how little conscience he has. But, in faith, had it not been for your honour's coming, I would have made him disgorge his winnings, and have taught him how many ounces go to the pound." — "What say you to this, friend?" quoth Sancho. The other answered, that all his adversary had said was true, and he did not intend to give him any more than four reals; for he was often giving him something, and they who expect the benevolence(201) should be mannerly, and take with a cheerful countenance whatever is given them, and not stand upon terms with the winners, unless they know them for certain to be sharpers, and that their winnings were unfairly gotten; and, for demonstration of his being an honest man, and no cheat, as the other alleged, there could be no stronger proof than his refusal to comply with his demand; for cheats are always tributaries to the lookers-on, who know them. "That is true," said the steward: "be pleased, my lord governor, to adjudge what shall be done with these men." — "What shall be done is this," answered Sancho: "you, Master Winner, good, bad, or indifferent, give your hackster here immediately an hundred reals, and pay down thirty more for the poor prisoners; and you, Sir, who have neither office nor benefice, and live without any employment in this island, take these hundred reals instantly, and, sometime to-morrow, get out of this island for ten years, on pain, if you transgress, of finishing your banishment in the next life; for I will hang you on a gallows, or at least the hangman shall do it for me; and let no man reply, lest I punish him severely." The one disbursed; the other received; the one went out of the island; the other went home to his house; and the governor said, "It shall cost me a fall, or I will demolish these gaming-houses; for I have a suspicion that they are very prejudicial." — "This, at least," said one of the scriveners, "your honour cannot put down; for a great person keeps it, and what he loses in the year is beyond comparison more than what he gets by the cards. Your worship may exert your authority against petty gaming-houses, which do more harm and cover more abuses; for in those, which belong to persons of quality, notorious cheats dare not put their tricks in practice; and, since the vice of play is become so common, it is better it should go forward in the houses of people of distinction, than in those of mean quality, where they take in unfortunate bubbles after midnight, and strip off their very skin." — "Well, Master Notary," quoth Sancho, "there is a great deal to be said on this subject."

And now up came a servant, having laid hold of a young man, and said, "My lord governor, this youth was coming towards us; but, as soon as he perceived it was the round, he faced about, and began to run like a stag; a sign he must be some delinquent. I pursued him, and had he not stumbled and fallen, I should never have overtaken him." — "Why did you fly, young man?" quoth Sancho. The youth replied: "My lord, to avoid answering the multitude of questions officers are wont to ask." — "What trade are you of?" quoth Sancho. "A weaver," answered the youth. "And what do you weave?" quoth Sancho. "Iron heads for spears, an' it please your worship." — "You are pleasant with me, and value yourself upon being a joker," quoth Sancho: "it is very well; and whither were you going?" — "To take the air, Sir," replied the lad. "And pray, where do people take the air in this island?" said Sancho. "Where it blows," answered the youth. "Good," quoth Sancho;" you answer to the purpose; you are a discreet youth. But now, make account that I am the -[504]- air, and that I blow in your poop, and drive you to gaol. Here, lay hold on him, and carry him to prison; I will make him sleep there to-nigh: without air." — "Before God," said the youth, "your honour can no more make me sleep there, than you can make me a king." — "Why cannot I make you sleep in prison?" demanded Sancho;" have I not power to confine or release you, as I please?" — "How much power soever your worship may have, you have not enough to make me sleep in prison." — "Why not?" replied Sancho: "away with him immediately, where he shall see his mistake with his own eyes; and, lest the gaoler should put his interested generosity in practice, I will sconce him in the penalty of two thousand ducats, if he suffers you to stir a step from the prison." — "All this is matter of laughter," answered the youth; "the business is, I defy all the world to make me sleep this night in prison." — "Tell me, devil," quoth Sancho, "have you some angel to deliver you, and unloose the fetters I intend to have clapped on you?" — "My lord governor," answered the youth, with an air of pleasantry, "let us abide by reason, and come to the point. Supposing your worship orders me to gaol, and to be loaded with chains and fetters, and clapped into the dungeon, with heavy penalties laid upon the gaoler if he lets me stir out; and let us suppose these orders punctually obeyed; yet, for all that, if I have no mind to sleep, but to keep awake all night, without so much as shutting my eyelids, can your worship, with all your power, make me sleep whether I will or no?" — "No, certainly," said the secretary, "and the man has carried his point." — "So that," quoth Sancho, "you would forbear sleeping only to have your own will, and not out of pure contradiction to mine?" — "No, my lord," said the youth, "not even in thought." — "Then God be with you," quoth Sancho;" go home to sleep, and I wish you a good night's rest; for I will not endeavour to deprive you of it; but I would advise you, for the future, not to be so jocose with officers of justice; for you may meet with one that may lay the joke over your noddle."

The youth went his way, and the governor continued his round; and, a little while after, came a couple of sergeants, who had hold of a man. and said, "My lord governor, this person, who seems to be a man, is not so, but a woman, and no ugly one neither, in man's clothes." They lifted up two or three lanterns to her face, by the light of which they discovered that of a woman, seemingly sixteen years of age, or thereabouts. Her hair was tucked up under a network cawl of gold and green silk, and she herself beautiful as a thousand pearls. They viewed her from head to foot, and saw she had on a pair of flesh-coloured stockings, with garters of white taffeta, and tassels of gold and seed-pearl: her breeches were of green and gold tissue, and she had on a loose coat of the same, under which she wore a very fine waistcoat of white and gold stuff; her shoes were white, and such as men wear. She had no sword, but a very rich dagger; and on her fingers were many rings, and those very good ones. In a word, everybody liked the maiden; but none of them all knew her, and the inhabitants of the town said, they could not imagine who she should be. They who were in the secret of the jests put upon Sancha admired the most; for this adventure was not of their contriving, and therefore they were in suspense, expecting the issue of this unforeseen accident. Sancho was struck with the beauty of the young lady, and asked her who she was, whither she was going, and what had moved her to dress herself in that habit. She, fixing her eyes on the ground, with a -[505]- modest bashfulness, answered, "Sir, I cannot declare so publicly what I am so much concerned to keep a secret; only one thing I must assure you, that I am no thief, nor criminal person, but an unhappy maiden, whom the force of a certain jealousy has made break through the respect due to modesty." The steward, hearing this, said to Sancho, "My lord governor, order all your attendants to go aside, that this lady may speak her mind with less concern." The governor did so, and they all went aside, excepting the steward, the sewer, and the secretary. Then the damsel proceeded, saying: "I, gentlemen, am daughter to Pedro Perez Mazorca, who farms the wool of this town, and comes frequently to my father's house." — "This will not pass, Madam," said the steward; "for I know Pedro Perez very well, and am sure he has no child, son nor daughter; and, besides your saying he is your father, you immediately add, that he comes often to your father's house." — "I took notice of that," quoth Sancho. — "Indeed, gentlemen," answered the damsel, "I am in such confusion, that I know not what I say; but the truth is, I am daughter to Diego de la Llana, whom you must all know." — "This may pass," answered the steward; "for I know Diego de la Llana, that he is a gentleman of quality, and rich, and has a son and a daughter; and, since he has been a widower, nobody in all this town can say they have seen the face of his daughter; for he keeps her so confined, that he will not give the sun leave to shine upon her; and report says she is extremely handsome." — "That is true," answered the damsel; "and that daughter am I. Whether fame lies or no, as to my beauty, you, gentlemen, are judges, since you have seen me;" and then she begun to weep most bitterly. The secretary perceiving this, whispered the sewer, and said very softly, "Without doubt, something of importance must have been the occasion, that so considerable a person, as this young lady, has left her own house, in such a dress, and at such an hour." — "No doubt of that," answered the sewer;" besides, this suspicion is confirmed by her tears." Sancho comforted her the best he could, and desired her to tell them the whole matter, without fear; for they would all endeavour to serve her with great sincerity, and by all possible ways.

"The case is, gentlemen," replied she, "that my father has kept me locked up these ten years past; for so long has my mother been under ground. Mass is said in our house in a rich chapel, and, in all this time, I have seen nothing but the sun in the heavens by day, and the moon and stars by night; nor do I know what streets, squares, or churches are, nor even men, excepting my father and brother, and Pedro Perez the wool farmer, whose constant visits to our house led me to say he was my father, to conceal the truth. This confinement, and denying me leave to go out, though but to church, has for many days and months past disquieted me very much. I had a mind to see the world, or at least the town where I was born, thinking this desire was no breach of that decency young ladies ought to preserve toward themselves. When I heard talk of bull-feasts, of darting canes on horseback, and the representation of plays, I asked my brother, who is a year younger than myself, to tell me what those things were, and several others, that I had never seen, which he used to do in the best manner he could; and all this did but inflame the desire I had of seeing them. In a word, to shorten the story of my ruin, I prayed and entreated my brother — O that I had never prayed nor entreated him!" and then she fell to weeping again. The steward said to her, "Proceed, Madam, and make an end of telling us what has befallen you; for your words and -[506]- tears hold us all in suspense." — "I have but few words left to speak," answered the damsel, "though many tears to shed; for such misplaced desires as mine can be atoned for no other way."

The beauty of the damsel had rooted itself in the soul of the sewer, who held up his lantern again, to have another view of her; and he fancied the tears she shed were dewdrops of the morning, or even Orient pearls; and he heartily wished her misfortune might not be so great as her tears and sighs seemed to indicate. The governor was out of all patience at the girl's dilatory manner of telling her story, and bid her keep them no longer in suspense, for it grew late, and they had a great deal more of the town to go over. She, between interrupted sobs and broken sighs, said, "All my misfortunes and unhappiness is only this, that I desired my brother to dress me in his clothes, and carry me out, some night or other, when my father was asleep, to see the town. He, importuned by my entreaties, condescended to my desire; and, putting me on this habit, and dressing himself in a suit of mine, which fits as if it were made for him, for he has not one hair of a beard, and one would take him for a very beautiful young girl; this night, about an hour ago, we got out of our house; and, guided by our foot-boy and our own unruly fancies, we traversed the whole town; and, as we were returning home, we saw a great company of people, and my brother said to me, 'Sister, this must be the round; put wings to your feet, and fly after me, that they may not know us, or it will be worse for us,' And, so saying, he turned his back, and began, not to run, but to fly. In less than six steps, I fell down through the fright, and at that instant the officer of justice coming up, seized and brought me before your honour, where my indiscreet longing has covered me with shame before so many people." — "In effect, then, Madam," quoth Sancho, "no other mishap has befallen you; nor did jealousy, as you told us at the beginning of your story, carry you from home?" — "No other thing," said she, "has befallen me, nor is there any jealousy in the case, but merely a desire of seeing the world, which went no farther then seeing the streets of this town."

The coming up of two sergeants, one of whom had overtaken and seized her brother, as he fled from his sister, confirmed the truth of what the damsel had said. The youth had on nothing but a rich petticoat, and a blue damask mantle, with a border of gold; no head-dress nor ornament, but his own hair, which was so fair and curled, that it seemed so many ringlets of fine gold. The governor, the steward, and the sewer, took him aside, and, without letting his sister hear, they asked him how he came to be in that disguise. He, with no less bashfulness and concern, told the same story his sister had done; at which the enamoured sewer was much pleased. But the governor said, "Really, gentlefolks, this is a very childish trick, and, to relate this piece of folly, there needed not half so many tears and sighs; had you but said, our names are so-and-so; we got out of our father's house by such a contrivance, only out of curiosity, and with no other design at all, the tale had been told, and all these weepings and wailings, and takings-on at this rate, might have been spared." — "That is true," answered the damsel; "but the confusion I was in was so great, that it did not suffer me to demean myself as I ought." — "There is no harm," answered Sancho: "we will see you safe to your father's; perhaps he has not missed you; and henceforward be not so childish, nor so eager to see the world; for the maid that is modest, and a broken leg, should stay at home; and, the woman and the hen are lost by gadding abroad; and she, who desires to see, desires no less -[507]- to be seen. I say no more." The youth thanked the governor for the favour he intended them, in seeing them safe home, and so they bent their course that way; for the house was not far off. When they were arrived, the brother threw up a little stone to a grated window, and that instant a servant-maid, who waited for them, came down and opened the door, and they went in, leaving everyone in admiration at their genteelness and beauty, as well as at their desire of seeing the world by night, and without stirring out of the town; but they imputed all to their tender years. The sewer's heart was pierced through and through, and he proposed within himself to demand her, the next day, of her father in marriage, taking it for granted he would not refuse him, as being a servant of the duke's. Sancho too had some thoughts of matching the young man with his daughter Sanchica, and determined to bring it about the first opportunity, fancying to himself that no match would be refused the governor's daughter. Thus ended that night's round, and two days after the government too, which put an end to all his designs and expectations, as shall hereafter be shown.