CHAPTER VII

Of the second Sally of our good Knight Don Quixote de la Mancha.
 

While they were thus employed, Don Quixote began to call out aloud, saying, "Here valorous knights, here ye must exert the force of your valiant arms; for the courtiers begin to get the better of the tournament." This noise and outcry, to which they all ran, put a stop to all farther scrutiny of the books that remained; and, therefore, it is believed that to the fire, without being seen or heard, went the Carolea and Leon of Spain, with the Acts of the Emperor, composed by Don Louis de Avila, which, without doubt, must have been among those that were left and perhaps had the priest seen them, they had not undergone so rigorous a sentence. When they came to Don Quixote he was already got out of bed, and continued his outcries and ravings, with his drawn sword laying furiously about him, back-stroke and fore-stroke, being as broad awake as if he had never been asleep. They closed in with him, and laid him upon his bed by main force; and, after he was a little composed, turning himself to talk to the priest, he said, "Certainly, my Lord Archbishop Turpin, it is a great disgrace to us, who call ourselves the twelve peers, to let the knights-courtiers (26) carry off the victory without more opposition, after we, the adventurers, had gained the prize in the three preceding days." — "Say no more, good brother," said the priest; "it may be God's will to change our fortune, and what is lost to-day may be won to-morrow: mind your health for the present; for I think you must needs be extremely fatigued, if not sorely wounded."— "Wounded! no," said Don Quixote; "but bruised and battered I am for certain: for that bastard Don Roldan has pounded me to mash with the trunk of an oak, and all out of mere envy, because he sees that I am the sole rival of his prowess. But let me never more be called Rinaldo de Montauban, if, as soon as I am able to rise from this bed, I do not make him pay dear for it in spite of all his enchantments: but at present bring me some breakfast, for I know nothing will do me so much good; and let me alone to revenge myself." They did so; they gave him some victuals, and he fell fast asleep again, and left them in fresh admiration at his madness.

That night the housekeeper set fire to, and burnt all the books that were in the yard, and in the house too: and some must have perished that deserved to be treasured up in perpetual archives; but their fate, and the laziness of the scrutineer, would not permit it; and in them was -[24]- fulfilled the saying, "that the just sometimes suffer for the unjust." One of the remedies which the priest and barber prescribed at that time for their friend's malady was to alter his apartment and wall up the room where the books had been, that when he got up he might not find them; in hopes that the cause being removed, the effect might cease; and that they should pretend that an enchanter had carried them away, room and all; which was presently done accordingly. Within two days after, Don Quixote got up, and the first thing he did was to visit his books; and not finding the room where he left it, he went up and down looking for it. He came to the place where the door used to be, and he felt with his hands, and stared about every way without speaking a word; but after some time he asked the housekeeper whereabouts the room stood where his books were. She, who was already well tutored what to answer, said to him: "What room, or what nothing does your worship look for? There is neither room nor books in this house, for the devil himself has carried all away." — "It was not the devil," said the niece, "but an enchanter, who came one night upon a cloud, the day after your departure hence, and alighting from a serpent on which he rode, (27) entered into the room, and I know not what he did there; but after some little time out he came, flying through the roof, and left the house full of smoke: and when we went to see what he had been doing, we saw neither books nor room; only we very well remember, both myself and mistress housekeeper here, that when the old thief went away he said with a loud voice that, for a secret enmity he bore to the owner of those books and of the room, he had done a mischief in this house which should soon be manifest. He told us also that he was called the sage Munniaton." — "Freston, (28) he meant to say," quoth Don Quixote. "I know not," answered the housekeeper, "whether his name be Freston or Friton; all I know is, that it ended in ton" — "It doth so," replied Don Quixote. He is a wise enchanter, a great enemy of mine, and bears me a grudge, because by his skill and learning he knows that in process of time I shall engage in single combat with a knight whom he favours, and shall vanquish him without his being able to prevent it; and for this cause he endeavours to do me all the unkindness he can: but let him know from me it will be difficult for him to withstand or avoid what is decreed by heaven." — "Who doubts of that?" said the niece. "But, dear uncle, who puts you upon these squabbles? Would it not be better to stay quietly at home, and not ramble about the world seeking for better bread than wheaten, and not considering that many go for wool and return shorn themselves?" — "O dear niece," answered Don Quixote, "how little do you know of the matter! Before they shall shear me, I will pluck and tear off the beards of all those who dare think of touching the tip of a single hair of mine." Neither of them would make any farther reply, for they saw his choler began to take fire. He stayed after this fifteen days at home, very quiet, without discovering any symptom of an inclination to repeat his late frolics, in which time there passed very pleasant discourses between him and his two neighbours, the priest and the barber, he affirming that the world stood in need of nothing so much as knights-errant and the revival of chivalry. The priest sometimes contradicted him, and at other times acquiesced; for had he not made use of this artifice there would have been no means left to bring him to reason.

In the meantime, Don Quixote tampered with a labourer, a neighbour of his, and an honest man, if such an epithet may be given to one that is -[25]- poor, but very shallow-brained. In short, he said so much, used so many arguments, and promised him such great matters, that the poor fellow resolved to sally out with him and serve him as his squire. Among other things, Don Quixote told him he should dispose himself to go with him willingly, because, some time or other, such an adventure might present that an island might be won in the turn of a hand, and he be left governor of it. With these and the like promises, Sancho Panza, for that was the labourer's name, left his wife and children, and hired himself for a squire to his neighbour. Don Quixote presently cast about how to raise money, and by selling one thing and pawning another, and losing by all, he scraped together a tolerable sum. He fitted himself likewise with a buckler, which he borrowed of a friend; and patching up his broken helmet the best he could, he acquainted his squire Sancho of the day and hour he intended to set out; that he might provide himself with what he should find to be most needful. Above all, he charged him not to forget a wallet: and Sancho said he would be sure to carry one, and that he intended also to take with him an ass he had, being a very good one, because he was not used to travel much on foot. As to the ass, Don Quixote paused a little, endeavouring to recollect whether any knight-errant had ever carried a squire mounted ass-wise; but no instance of the kind occurred to his memory. However, he consented that he should take his ass with him, purposing to accommodate him more honourably the first opportunity, by dismounting the first discourteous knight he should meet. He provided himself also with shirts and what other things he could, conformably to the advice given him by the inn-keeper.

All which being done and accomplished, Don Quixote and Sancho Panza, without taking leave, the one of his wife and children, and the other of his housekeeper and niece, one night sallied out of the village unperceived by anyone; and they travelled so hard, that by break of day they believed themselves secure of not being found, though search was made after them. Sancho Panza went riding upon his ass like any patriarch, with his wallet and leathern bottle, and with a vehement desire to find himself governor of the island which his master had promised him. Don Quixote happened to take the same route he had done in his first expedition through the plain of Montiel, which he passed over with less uneasiness than the time before; for it was early in the morning, and the rays of the sun darting on them aslant gave them no disturbance. Now Sancho Panza said to his master: "I beseech your worship, good Sir Knight-errant, that you forget not your promise concerning that same island; for I shall know how to govern it, be it never so big." To which Don Quixote answered: "You must know, friend Sancho Panza, that it was a custom much in use among the knights-errant of old, to make their squires governors of the islands or kingdoms they conquered; and I am determined that so laudable a custom shall not be lost for me. On the contrary, I resolve to outdo them in it: for they sometimes, and perhaps most times, stayed till their squires were grown old; and when they were worn out in their service, and had undergone many bad days and worse nights, they gave them some title, as that of Count, or at least Marquis, of some valley or province, be it greater or less: but if you live and I live, before six days are ended, I may probably win such a kingdom as may have others depending on it, as fit as if they were cast in a mould, for thee to be crowned king of one of them. And do not think this any extraordinary matter; for things fall out -[26]- to such knights by such unforeseen and unexpected ways that I may easily give thee more than I promise." — "So then," answered Sancho Panza, "if I were a king by some of those miracles you are pleased to mention, Mary Gutierrez, my crooked rib, would at least come to be a queen, and my children infantas." — "Who doubts it?" answered Don Quixote. "I doubt it," replied Sancho Panza; "for I am verily persuaded, that if God were to rain down kingdoms upon the earth, none of them would sit well upon the head of Maria Gutierrez; for you must know, Sir, she is not worth two farthings for a queen. The title of countess, God help her, would sit much better upon her." — "Recommend her to God, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "and he will do what is best for her: but do thou have a care not to debase thy mind so low as to content thyself with being less than a lord-lieutenant." — "Sir, I will not," answered Sancho, "especially having so great a man for my master as your worship, who will know how to give me whatever is most fitting for me, and what you find me best able to bear."