CHAPTER LXI

On what befell Don Quixote at Ms Entrance into Barcelona; with other Events more true than ingenious.
 

Three days and three nights Don Quixote stayed with Roque; and, had he stayed three hundred years, he would not have wanted subject matter for observation and admiration in his way of life. Here they lodge, there they dine; one while they fly, not knowing from whom; another, they lie in wait they know not for whom. They slept standing, with interrupted slumbers, and shifting from one place to another; they were perpetually sending out spies, posting sentinels, blowing the matches of their muskets; though they had but few, most of them making use of firelocks. Roque passed the nights apart from his followers, in places to them unknown; for the many proclamations the viceroy of Barcelona had published against -[558]- him, kept him in fear and disquiet, not daring to trust anybody, and apprehensive lest his own men should either kill or deliver him up to justice, for the price set upon his head: a life truly miserable and irksome. In short, Roque, Don Quixote, and Sancho, attended by six squires, set out for Barcelona, through unfrequented ways, short cuts, and covered paths. They arrived upon the strand on the eve of Saint John, in the night-time; and Roque embracing Don Quixote and Sancho, to whom he gave the ten crowns promised, but not yet given him, left them with a thousand offers of service made on both sides.

Roque returned back, and Don Quixote stayed expecting the day on horseback, just as he was; and it was not long before the face of the beautiful Aurora began to discover itself through the balconies of the east, rejoicing the grass and flowers, instead of rejoicing the ears; though at the same instant, the ears also were rejoiced by the sound of abundance of waits and kettle-drums, the jingling of morrice-bells, with the trampling of horsemen, seemingly coming out of the city. Aurora gave place to the sun, which was rising by degrees from below the horizon, with a face bigger than a target. Don Quixote and Sancho, casting their eyes around on every side, saw the sea, which till then they had never seen. It appeared to them very large and spacious, somewhat bigger than the lakes of Ruydera, which they had seen in La Mancha. They saw the galleys lying close to the shore, which, taking in their awnings, appeared full of streamers and pennants trembling in the wind, and kissing and brushing the water. From within them sounded clarions, trumpets, and waits, filling the air all around with sweet and martial music. Presently the galleys began to move and to skirmish, as it were, on the still waters; and, at the same time corresponding with them, as it were, on the land, an infinite number of cavaliers, mounted on beautiful horses and attended with gay liveries, issued forth from the city. The soldiers on board the galleys discharged several rounds of cannon, which were answered by those on the walls and forts of the city. The heavy artillery, with dreadful noise rent the wind, which was echoed back by the cannon on the forecastles of the galleys. The sea was cheerful, the land jocund, and the air bright, only now and then obscured a little by the smoke of the artillery. All which together seemed to infuse and engender a sudden pleasure in all the people. Sancho could not imagine how those bulks, which moved backwards and forwards in the sea, came to have so many legs.

By this time those with the liveries came up on a full gallop, with lelilies and shouts, after the Moorish fashion, to the place where Don Quixote was standing, wrapped in wonder and surprise; and one of them (the person to whom Roque had sent the letter) said in a loud voice to Don Quixote: "Welcome to our city, the mirror, the beacon, and polar star of knight-errantry, in its greatest extent: welcome, I say, the valorous Don Quixote de la Mancha; not the spurious, the fictitious, the apocryphal, lately exhibited among us in lying histories, but the true, the legitimate, the genuine, described to us by Cid Hamete Benengeli, the flower of historians. Don Quixote answered not a word, nor did the cavaliers wait for any answer; but, wheeling about with all their followers, they began to career and curvet it round Don Quixote, who, turning to Sancho, said: "These people seem to know us well; I will lay a wager they have read our history, and even that of the Arragonese lately printed." The gentleman, who spoke to Don Quixote, said again to him: "Be pleased, Signor Don -[559]- Quixote, to come along with us; for we are all very humble servants, and great friends of Roque Guinart." To which Don Quixote replied: "If courtesies beget courtesies, yours, good Sir, is daughter, or very near kinswoman to those of the great Roque; conduct me whither you please; for I have no other will but yours, especially if you please to employ it in your service." The gentleman answered in expressions no less civil; and enclosing him in the midst of them, they all marched with him to the sound of waits and drums, toward the city, at the entrance of which the wicked one, who is the author of all mischief, so ordered it, that, among the boys, who are more wicked than the wicked one himself, two bold and unlucky rogues crowded through the press, and one of them lifting up Dapple's tail, and the other that of Rozinante, they thrust under each a handful of briers. The poor beasts felt the new spurs, and by clapping their tails the closer, augmented their smart in such sort, that, after several plunges, they flung their riders to the ground. Don Quixote, out of countenance, and affronted, hastened to free his horse's tail from this new plumage, and Sancho did the like by Dapple. Those who conducted Don Quixote would have chastised the insolence of the boys; but it was impossible, for they were soon lost among above a thousand more that followed them. Don Quixote and Sancho mounted again, and, with the same acclamations and music, arrived at their conductor's house; which was large and fair, such, in short, as became a gentleman of fortune: where we will leave them for the present; for so Cid Hamete Benengeli will have it.