CHAPTER LXXII

How Don Quixote and Sancho arrived at their Village
 

DON QUIXOTE and Sancho, looking for night, stayed in that inn; the one to end in the open fields the task of his discipline; and the other to see the success of it, whence depended the end of his desires. During which time, a gentleman on horseback, followed by three or four servants, came to the gate of the inn, to whom one of his attendants said thus: ‘My Lord Don Alvaro Tarfe, you may here rest yourself, and pass the great heat of the day; this inn seemeth to be very cleanly and cool.’

Which speech Don Quixote hearing, he said unto Sancho, ‘Thou oughtest to know that when I turned over the book of the Second Part of my History, methought that, in reading of the same, I met with this name of Don Alvaro Tarfe.’

‘That may very well be,’ said Sancho; ‘but first let us see him alight from his horse, and then we will speak unto him.’

The knight alighted, and the hostess appointed him a low chamber near unto that of Don Quixote, and which was furnished with like figures of painted serge. The new-come knight did forthwith put off his heavy clothes, and now going out of the inn-porch, which was somewhat spacious and fresh, under which Don Quixote was walking, he demanded of him, ‘Whither go you, my good sir gentleman?’ ‘I am going,’ answered Don Quixote, ‘unto a certain village not far off, where I was born.’ ‘And you, my lord, whither go you?’ ‘I travel,’ said the knight,’ towards Granada, which is my native country.’ ‘Sir, you were born,’ replied Don Quixote, ‘in a very good country. In the meantime, I pray you in courtesy tell me your name; for it stands me very much upon to know it, yea, more than can well be imagined.’ ‘I am called Don Alvaro Tarfe,’ answered the knight. ‘Then are you undoubtedly,’ quoth Don Quixote, ‘that Alvaro Tarfe whose name is imprinted in The Second Part of the History of Don Quixote de la Mancha, which a modern author hath lately set forth.’ ‘I am the very same man of whom you speak,’ said the knight; ‘and that Don Quixote, who is the principal subject of such an history, was my very great friend. It was even I that drew him first out of his village, or at least that persuaded him to be at the jousts and tiltings which were then kept at Saragosa, and whither I was going; and in good truth I did him a great favour, for I was the cause that the hangman did not well claw and bumbaste his back, having rightly deserved such a punishment, because he had been over-rash and foolhardy.’

‘But tell me, I beseech you, then,’ quoth Don Quixote, ‘my Lord Don Alvaro, do I in anything resemble the said Don Quixote of whom you speak? ‘Nothing at all,’ answered the other. ‘And did that Don Quixote,’ replied our knight, ‘conduct with him a squire named Sancho Panza?’ ‘Yes, verily,’ quoth Don Alvaro; ‘and the report went that this squire was very blithe, pleasant, and gamesome; but yet I never heard him speak anything with a good garb or grace, nor any one word that might cause laughter.’

‘I believe it well,’ said Sancho then; ‘for it suits not with all the world to be pleasant and jesting; and the very same Sancho of whom you speak, my lord and gentleman, must be some notorious rogue, some greedy-gut, and notable thief. It is I that am the right Sancho Panza, that can tell many fine tales, yea, more than there are drops of water when it raineth. If so you please, my lord, you may make experience of it, and follow me at least one year, and you shall then see that at every step I shall speak so many unpleasant things that very often. without knowing what I utter, I make all them to laugh that listen unto me. In good sooth, Don Quixote de la Mancha, the far-renowned, the valiant, the discreet, the amorous; he who is the redresser of wrongs, the revenger of outrages, the tutor of infants, the guardian of orphans, the rampire or fortress of widows, the defender of damsels and maidens; he who hath for his only mistress the matchless Dulcinea del Toboso, is the very same lord whom you see here present, and who is my good master. All other Don Quixotes and all other Sancho Panzas are but dreams, fopperies, and fables.’

‘Now by my halidom I believe as much,’ answered Don Alvaro’; ‘for in those few words by you even now uttered you have showed more grace than ever did the other Sancho Panza in all the long and tattling discourses that I have heard come from him. He savoured more of the gourmand than of a well-spoken man; more of a coxcomb than of a pleasant. Without doubt I believe that the enchanters which persecute the good Don Quixote have also gone about to persecute me, in making me to know the other Don Quixote, who is of no worth or merit at all. Nevertheless, I wot not well what to say of it, since I durst swear that I left him at Toledo, in the Nuncio’s house, to the end he might be cured and healed, and behold here another Don Quixote, but far different from mine.

‘As for me,’ quoth Don Quixote, ‘I know not whether I be good or no, but well I wot I am not the bad. And for a manifest trial of my saying, my lord Don Alvaro Tarfe, if you please, you shall understand that in all my lifetime I was never at Saragosa. And having of late understood that the imaginary Don Quixote had been present at the tournaments and tiltings in that city, I would by no means come or go into it, that in view of all the world I might manifest his false tale, which was the reason that I went straight unto Barcelona, the treasury or storehouse of all courtesy, the retreat and refuge of all strangers, the relieving harbour of the poor and needy, the native home of valorous men, where such as be wronged or offended are avenged, and where true friendships are reciprocal, and, in sum, a city that hath no peer, be it either for beauty or for the fair situation of it. And albeit what hath befallen me bring me no great contentment, I do notwithstanding somewhat allay the grief with the pleasure which by the sight thereof I have received and felt. To conclude, my Lord Don Alvaro Tarfe, I am Don Quixote de la Mancha, and the very same man of whom fame speaketh, and not he, that unhappy wretch, who, to honour himself with my designs, hath gone about to usurp my name. In the meanwhile I humbly beseech you, by the profession which you make to be a noble knight, that before the ordinary judge of this place you will be pleased to make me a declaration and certificate, how, so long as you have lived, even until this present hour, you never saw me, and that I am not the said Don Quixote imprinted in this Second Part, and likewise that this Sancho Panza, my squire, is not he whom you heretofore have known.’

‘I shall do it with all my heart,’ quoth the knight Don Alvaro, ‘although I be very much amazed to see two Don Quixotes and behold two Sanchos at one very instant, so conformable in name and so different in actions. But I tell you again and again, and I assuredly believe, that I have not viewed what I have seen, and that what hath happened unto me concerning this subject hath not befallen at all.’

‘Without doubt, my lord,’ then said Sancho, ‘it is very likely that you are enchanted, even as my Lady Dulcinea of Toboso is. Would to God that your disenchanting might be brought to pass with giving other three thousand and odd whip-lashes as I do for her; I would most willingly give them unto myself, without any interest at all.’

‘I know not what you mean,’ quoth Don Alvaro, ‘by these whip-lashes.’ To whom Sancho said that it would be too long a discourse to relate, but yet he would make him acquainted with the whole story if peradventure they should both travel one same way.

By this time the hour of dinner was at hand, and they fed and eat together. At the very same time the judge of the place came into the inn, attended on by a clerk or notary, whom Don Quixote required that he would take a certificate or declaration which this knight Don Alvaro Tarfe would declare unto him, forasmuch as it did highly concern his honour and reputation.

Now the tenor of this declaration was that the said gentleman did in no sort know Don Quixote who was there present, and that he was not the man whose name they had lately imprinted in an History entitled The Second Part of Don Quixote de la Mancha, composed by Avellaneda, born at Tordesillas.

To conclude, the judge engrossed all according to the form of law. The declaration was made in form and manner as all notaries are accustomed to be in such and the like cases. By which means Don Quixote and Sancho rested very glad, and well apaid, as if such a declaration had been of very great moment and consequence unto them, and as if their actions and speeches had not apparently showed the difference and odds that was between the two Don Quixotes and the two Sanchos.

Divers compliments and many offices and offers of courtesy did mutually interpass between Don Alvaro and Don Quixote, wherein our heroic Knight de la Mancha declared so much wisdom and such discretion that he resolved Don Alvaro of the doubt wherein he was, for he persuaded himself that he was enchanted, since with his own hands he felt and touched two Don Quixotes, so different and contrary one to another.

Mid-day being past, and the heat allayed, they departed from that place altogether. They had not gone above half a league, but they met with two several paths; the one led to Don Quixote’s village, and the other to the place whither Don Alvaro was going.

During which little space Don Quixote related at large unto him the disaster of his overthrow, the enchantment, and the remedy of Dulcinea. All which things bred and caused a new admiration in the mind of Don Alvaro, who kept on his way, and Don Quixote his.

Our knight passed that night among the trees, to the end he might give Sancho means and leisure to fulfil his penance, which he accomplished even as he had done the fore-passed night, more at the charges of the hedges, shrubs, and trees there growing than of his back and shoulders, for he kept them so safe and well that the lashes which he gave himself would not have caused a fly to stir had she taken up her stand there.

Don Quixote, thus abused, lost not one stroke with misreckoning, and found that those of the foregoing night, joined unto these, were just the sum of three thousand, nine-and-twenty.

It seemed the sun rose that morning earlier than his wont to behold this sacrifice, and they perceiving that it was bright day, went on their journey, discoursing of the error wherein Don Alvaro was, and how they had done very well in taking a declaration before the judge, and that so authentically.

They wandered all that day, and the night succeeding, without encountering anything worthy the relation, unless it be that the very same night Sancho finished his whipping task, to the great contentment of Don Quixote, who greedily longed for peep of day, to see if in their travels they might meet with his sweet mistress Dulcinea, who was now disenchanted.

Thus wandering, they met no woman but they would approach and close with her, to take perfect view of her, and to discern whether it were Dulcinea of Toboso, confidently assuring themselves, as of an infallible truth, that the promises of the prophet Merlin could not possibly prove false.

Whilst they were musing on these things, and their longings increasing, they unawares ascended a little hillock, whence they discovered their village, which when Sancho had no sooner perceived, but he prostrated himself on his knees and uttered these words: ‘O my dear, dearly-beloved, and long-desired native country! open thine eyes, and behold how thy son Sancho returns at last to thee again; who if he be not very rich, yet is he at least very well whipped and lashed. Open thine arms likewise, and friendly receive thy son Don Quixote. And if he returneth to thee vanquished by the force of a strange arm, he yet at least returneth conqueror of himself. And as himself hath often told me, it is the greatest victory that any man can desire or wish for. I have good store of money; for, if they gave me sound whip-lashes, I found much good in being a worthy knight.’

‘Let us leave these fooleries,’ said Don Quixote, ‘and forthwith wend unto our village, where we will give free passage unto our imaginations, and prescribe unto ourselves the form and method that we are to keep and observe in the rural or pastoral life which we intend to put in practice.’ Thus reasoning together, they fair and gently descended the hillock, and approached to their village.