CHAPTER LXI

What happened to Don Quixote at his Entrance into Barcelona, with other Events, more true than witty
 

THREE days and three nights was Don Quixote with Roque, and had he been so three hundred years he should not have wanted matter to make him see and admire his kind of life. One while here they lie; another, there they dine. Sometimes they fly from they know not whom; otherwhile, they wait for they know not whom. They sleep standing, a broken sleep, changing from place to place: all was setting of spies, listening of sentinels, blowing musket-matches, though of such shot they had but few, most of them carrying petronels. Roque himself slept apart from the rest, not letting them know where he lodged; because the many proclamations which the Viceroy of Barcelona had caused to be made to take him made him unquiet and’ fearful, and so he durst trust nobody, fearing his own people would either kill or deliver him to the justice; a life indeed wretched and irksome. At length, by byways and cross-paths, Roque and Don Quixote got to the wharf of Barcelona, where Roque gave Sancho the ten crowns he promised him, and so they parted with many compliments on both parts.

Roque returned, and Don Quixote stayed there, expecting the day just as he was on horseback; and awhile after, the face of the white Aurora began to peep through the bay-windows of the east, cheering the herbs and flowers, instead of delighting the ear, and yet at the same instant a noise of hautboys and drums delighted their ears, and a noise of morris-bells, with a pat-a-pat of horsemen running, to see to, out of the city.

Aurora now gave the sun leave to rise out of the lowest part of the east, with his face as big as a buckler. Don Quixote and Sancho spread their eyes round about, and they might see the sea, which till that time they had never seen; it seemed unto them most large and spacious, more by far than the lake of Ruydera, which the saw in the Mancha; they beheld the galleys in the wharf, who, clapping down their tilts, discovered themselves full of flags and streamers, that waved in the wind, and kissed and swept the water; within, the clarines, trumpets, and hautboys sounded, that far and near filled the air with sweet and warlike accents; they began to move, and to make show of skirmish upon the gentle water; a world of gallants answering them on land, which came out of the city upon goodly horses, and brave in their liveries. The soldiers of the galleys discharged an infinite of shot, which were answered from the walls and forts of the city, and the great shot with fearful noise cut the air, which were answered with the galleys’ forecastle cannons; the sea was cheerful, the land jocund, the sky clear, only somewhat dimmed with the smoke of the artillery; it seemed to infuse and engender a sudden delight in all men. Sancho could not imagine how those bulks that moved upon the sea could have so many feet.

By this, they ashore in the rich liveries began to run on with their Moorish outcries, even to the very place where Don Quixote was wondering and amazed; and one of them, he who had the letter from Roque, said to Don Quixote thus aloud, ‘Welcome to our city is the looking-glass, the lanthorn, and north-star of all knight-errantry, where it is most in practice! Welcome, I say, is the valorous Don Quixote de la Mancha; not the false, fictitious, or apocryphal, that hath been demonstrated to us of late in false histories; but the true, legal, and faithful he, which Cid Hamet, the flower of historians, describes unto us!’ Don Quixote answered not a word, neither did the gentlemen expect he should; but, turning in and out with the rest, they wheeled about Don Quixote, who, turning to Sancho, said, ‘These men know us well; I lay a wager they have read our history, and that, too, of the Aragonian’s lately printed.’

The gentleman that spoke to Don Quixote came back again, and said to him, ‘Signior Don Quixote, come with us, I beseech you, for we are all your servants, and Roque Guinart’s dear friends.’ To which Don Quixote replied, ‘If courtesies engender courtesies, then yours, sir knight, is daughter or near kindred to Roque’s; carry me whither you will, for I am wholly yours, and at your service, if you please to command me.’ In the like courtly strain the gentleman answered him, and so, locking him in the midst of them, with sound of drums and hautboys, they carried him towards the city, where at his entrance, as ill luck would have it, and the boys that are the worst of all ill, two of them, bold crackropes, came among the thrust, and one of them lifting up Dapple’s tail, and the other Rozinante’s, they fastened each their handful of nettles. The poor beasts felt the new spurs, and, clapping their tails close, augmented their pains; so that, after a thousand winces, they cast down their masters.

Don Quixote, all abashed and disgraced, went to take this plumage from his courser’s tail, and Sancho from Dapple’s. Those that guided Don Quixote would have punished the boys for their sauciness, but it was not possible, for they got themselves into the thickest of a thousand others that followed. Don Quixote and Sancho returned to their seats, and with the same applause and music they came to their guide’s house, which was fair and large indeed, as was fit for a gentleman of means, where we will leave him for the present, because Cid Hamet will have it so.
 