CHAPTER XL

Of Matters that touch and pertain to this Adventure, and most Memorable History
 

CERTAINLY, all they that delight in such histories as this must be thankful to Cid Hamet, the author of the original, for his curiosity in setting down every little tittle, without leaving out the smallest matter that hath hot been distinctly brought to light; he paints out conceits; discovers imaginations, answers secrets, clears doubts, resolves arguments — to conclude, manifests the least mote of each curious desire. O famous author! O happy Don Quixote! O renowned Dulcinea! O pleasant Sancho! All together, and each in particular, long may you live, to the delight and general recreation of mortals.

The story then goes on, that just as Sancho saw the Afflicted dismayed he said, ‘As I am honest man, and by the memory of the Panzas, I never heard nor saw, nor my master never told me, nor could he ever conceit in his fancy, such an adventure as this. A thousand Satans take thee — not to curse thee for an enchanter as thou art — Giant Malambruno! and hadst thou no kind of punishment for these sinners but this bearding them? What, had it not been better and fitter for them to have bereaved them of half their noses, though they had snuffled for it, and not to have clapped these beards on them? I hold a wager they have no money to pay for their shaving.’ ‘You say true, sir,’ quoth one of the twelve; ‘we have nothing to cleanse us with, therefore some of us have used a remedy of sticking-plasters, which, applied to our faces, and clapped on upon a sudden, make them as plain and smooth as the bottom of a stone mortar; for, though in Candaya there be women that go up and down from house to house to take away the hair of the body, and to trim the eyebrows, and other slibber-sauces touching women, yet we, my lady’s women, would never admit them, because they smell something of the bawd; and, if Signior Don Quixote do not help us, we are like to go with beards to our graves.’ ‘I would rather lose mine amongst infidels,’ quoth Don Quixote, ‘than not ease you of yours.

By this the Trifaldi came to herself again, and said, ‘The very jingling of this promise came into my ears in the midst of my trance, and was enough to recover my senses; therefore once again, renowned Errant and untamed Sir, let me beseech you that your gracious promise be put in execution.’ ‘For my part, it shall,’ quoth Don Quixote. ‘Tell me, lady, what I am to do, for my mind is very prompt and ready to serve you.

‘Thus it is,’ quoth the Afflicted: ‘from hence to the kingdom of Candaya, if you go by land, you have five thousand leagues, wanting two or three; but, if you go in the air, some three thousand two hundred and seven and twenty by a direct line. You must likewise know that Malambruno told me that when fortune should bring me to the knight that must free us, that he would send a horse much better and with fewer tricks than your hirelings, which is the selfsame horse of wood on which the valiant Pierres stole and carried away the fair Magalona, which horse is governed by a pin that he hath in his forehead, that serves for a bridle, and flies in the air so swiftly as if the devils themselves carried him. This horse, according to tradition, was made by the sage Merlin, and he lent him to his friend Pierres, who made long voyages upon him, and stole away, as is said, the fair Magalona, carrying her in the air at his crupper, leaving all that beheld them on earth in a staring gaze; and he lent him to none but those whom he loved, or that paid him best; and, since the grand Pierres, hitherto we have not heard that any else hath come upon his back. Malambruno got him from thence by his art, and keeps him, making use of him in his voyages, which he hath every foot through all parts of the world; and he is here to-day, and to-morrow in France, and the next day at Jerusalem; and the best is that this horse neither eats nor sleeps, nor needs shoeing; and he ambles in the air without wings, that he that rides upon him may carry a cup full of water in his hand, without spilling a jot, he goes so soft and so easy, which made the fair Magalona glad to ride upon him.’

‘Then,’ quoth Sancho, ‘for your soft and easy going, my Dapple bears the bell, though he go not in the air; but upon earth I’ll play with him with all the amblers in the world.’

All of them laughed, and the Afflicted went on: ‘And this horse, if Malambruno will grant an end of our misfortune, within half an hour at night will be with us; for he told me that the sign that I had found the knight that should procure our liberty should be the sending of that horse, whither he should come speedily.’ ‘And how many, quoth Sancho, ‘may ride upon that horse?’ The Afflicted answered, ‘Two, one in the saddle and the other at the crupper; and most commonly such two are knight and squire, when some stolen damsel is wanting.’ ‘I would fain know, afflicted madam,’ quoth Sancho, ‘what this horse’s name is.’ ‘His name,’ quoth she, ‘is not like Bellerophon’s horse Pegasus, or Alexander’s the Great Bucephalus, or Orlando Furioso’s Briliadoro, or Bayarte Reynaldo’s de Montalvan, or Rogero’s Frontino, or Bo?tes, or Perithoa, the horses of the sun, nor Orelia, Rodrigo the last unhappy king of the Goths his horse, in that battle where he lost his life and kingdom together.’

‘I hold a wager,’ said Sancho, ‘that, since he hath none of all these famous known names, that his name neither is not Rozinante my master’s horse’s name, which goes beyond all those that have been named already.’

‘‘Tis true,’ quoth the bearded countess, ‘notwithstanding he hath a name that fits him very well, which is Clavileno the swift:1 first, because he is of wood; and then because of the pin in his forehead; so that, for his name he may compare with Rozinante.’ ‘I dislike not his name,’ said Sancho; ‘but what bridle or what halter is he governed with?’ ‘I have told,’ said the Trifaldi, ‘that with the pin, turned as pleaseth the party that rides on him, he will go either in the air, or raking and sweeping along the earth, or in a mean which ought to be sought in all well-ordered actions.’

‘I would fain see him,’ quoth Sancho; ‘but to think that I’ll get up on him, either in the saddle or at the crupper, were to ask pears of the elm. ‘Twere good, indeed, that I that can scarce sit upon Dapple, and a pack-saddle as soft as silk, should get up upon a wooden crupper without a cushion or pillow-bere. By Gad, I’ll not bruise myself to take away anybody’s beard; let every one shave himself as well as he can, for I’ll not go so long a voyage with my master; besides, there is no use of me for the shaving of these beards, as there is for the disenchanting my Lady Dulcinea.’ ‘Yes, marry, is there,’ said the Trifaldi, ‘and so much that I believe without you we shall do nothing.’ ‘God and the king!’2 quoth Sancho. ‘What have the squires to do with their masters’ adventures; they must reap the credit of ending them, and we must bear the burden? Body of me! if your historians would say, “Such a knight ended such an adventure, but with the help of such and such a squire, without whom it had been impossible to end it,” ‘twere something; but that they write drily, “Don Parlalipomenon, Knight of the Three Stars, ended the adventure of the six hobgoblins,” without naming his squire’s person that was present at all, as if he were not alive, I like it not, my masters; I tell you again my master may go alone — much good may it do him — and I’ll stay here with my lady the duchess, and it may be when he comes back he shall find the Lady Dulcinea’s business three-fold, nay, five-fold bettered; for I purpose at idle times and when I am at leisure to give myself a bout of whipping, bare-breeched.’ ‘For all that,’ quoth the duchess, ‘if need be you must accompany him, honest Sancho; for all good people will entreat that for your unnecessary fear these gentlewomen’s faces be not so thick-bearded, for it were great pity.’

‘God and the king again ’ quoth Sancho, ‘when this charity were performed for some retired damosels, as some working girls, a man might undertake any hazard; but for to unbeard waiting-women — a pox! I would I might see ‘em bearded from the highest to the lowest, from the nicest to the neatest.’ ‘You are still bitter against waiting-women, friend,’ quoth the duchess; ‘you are much addicted to the Toledonian apothecary’s opinion; but, on my faith, you have no reason, for I have women in my house that may be a pattern for waiting-women; and here is Donna Rodriguez, that will not contradict me. ‘Your Excellency,’ quoth Rodriguez, ‘may say what you will, God knows all. Whether we be good or bad, bearded or smooth, as we are our mothers brought us forth as well as other women, and, since God cast us into the world, He knows to what end; and I rely upon His mercy, and nobody’s beard.’

‘Well, Mistress Rodriguez and Lady Trifaldi,’ quoth Don Quixote, ‘I hope to God he will behold your sorrows with pitying eyes, and Sancho shall do as I will have him, if Clavileno were come once, and that I might encounter Malambruno; for I know no razor would shave you with more facility than my sword should shave Malambruno’s head from his shoulders, for God permits the wicked, but not for ever.’

‘Ah!’ quoth the Afflicted, ‘now all the stars of the heavenly region look upon your greatness, valorous knight, with a gentle aspect, and infuse all prosperity into your mind, and all valour, and make you the shield and succour of all dejected and reviled waiting-womanship, abominable to apothecaries, backbited by squires, and scoffed at by pages. And the devil take the quean that in the flower of her youth put not herself in a nunnery rather than be a waiting-woman, unfortunate as we are; for, though we descend in a direct line, by man to man, from Hector the Trojan, yet our mistresses will never leave bethouing of us, though they might be queens for it. O giant Malambruno! (for though thou beest an enchanter, thou art most sure in thy promises), send the matchless Clavileno unto us, that our misfortune may have an end; for, if the heats come in, and these beards of ours last, woe be to our ill fortune!’

This the Trifaldi said with so much feeling that she drew tears from all the spectators’ eyes, and stroked them even from Sancho’s; so that now he resolved to accompany his master to the very end of the world, so he might obtain the taking the wool from those venerable faces.
 

        1 Clavo, a nail or wooden pin;  Leno, wood, in Spanish.
        2 Aqui del Roy: the usual speech of officers in Spain, when any arrested person resists.

