CHAPTER LXVII

Of the Resolution Don Quixote had to turn Shepherd, and to lead a Country Life, whilst the Promise for his Year was expired, with other Accidents, truly Good and Savoury
 

IF DON QUIXOTE  were much troubled in mind before his fall, he was so much more after it. He stood shading himself under the tree, as you heard, and there his thoughts set upon him, as flies upon honey; some tending to the disenchantment of Dulcinea, others to the life that he meant to lead in the time of his forced retirement.

Sancho now drew near, and extolled the liberality of Tosilos.

‘Is it possible, Sancho,’ said Don Quixote, ‘that still thou thinkest that that was a true lackey, and that thou hast forgotten too that Dulcinea was converted and transformed into a country-wench, and the Knight of the Looking-glasses into the bachelor Samson Carrasco; all these by the doings of enchanters my enemies that persecute me? But tell me now, didst thou ask that Tosilos what became of Altisidora? did she lament my absence, or hath she forgotten her amorous passions, that when I was present troubled her?’

‘I never thought on’t,’ said Sancho, ‘neither had I leisure to ask after such fooleries. Body of me, sir, you are now in a humour of asking after other folks’ thoughts, and amorous ones, too.’

‘Look thee, Sancho, there is a great deal of difference betwixt love and gratefulness; it may well be that a gentleman may not be amorous, but it cannot be, speaking in all rigour, that he should be ungrateful. Altisidora in likelihood loved me very well; she gave me the three nightcaps thou wottest of; she cried at my departure, cursed me, reviled me, and without modesty railed publicly; all signs that she adored me; for the anger of lovers often ends in maledictions. I could give her no comfort, nor no treasure, all I have being dedicated to Dulcinea; and the treasure of knights-errant is like that of fairies, false and apparent only; and all I can do is but to remember her; and this I may do, without prejudice to Dulcinea, whom thou wrongest with thy slackness in whipping thyself, and in chastising that flesh of thine, that I wish I might see devoured by wolves, that had rather preserve itself for worms than for the remedy of that poor lady.’

‘Sir,’ said Sancho, ‘if you will have the truth, I cannot persuade myself that the lashing of my posteriors can have any reference to the disenchanting of the enchanted; which is as much as if you should say, “If your head grieve you, anoint your knees”; at least, I dare swear, that in as many histories as you have read of knight-errantry, you never saw whipping disenchant anybody; but, howsoever, I will take it when I am in the humour, and when time serves I’ll chastise myself.’

‘God grant thou dost,’ said Don Quixote, ‘and Heaven give thee grace to fall into the reckoning and obligation thou hast to help my lady, who is thy lady too, since thou art mine.’

With this discourse they held on their way, till they came just to the place where the bulls had overrun them; and Don Quixote called it to mind, and said to Sancho, ‘ In this field we met the brave shepherdesses, and the lusty swains, that would have imitated and renewed the Pastoral Arcadia; an invention as strange as witty; in imitation of which, if thou thinkest fit, Sancho, we will turn shepherds for the time that we are to live retired; I’ll buy sheep, and all things fit for our pastoral vocation; and calling myself by the name of the shepherd Quixotiz, and thou the shepherd Panzino, we will walk up and down the hills, through woods and meadows, singing and versifying, and drinking the liquid crystal of the fountains, sometimes out of the clear springs, and then out of the swift-running rivers. The oaks shall afford us plentifully of the most sweet fruit, and the bodies of hardest cork-trees shall be our seats; the willows shall give us shade, the roses their perfume, and the wide meadows carpets of a thousand flourished colours; the air shall give us a free and pure breath; the moon and stars, in spite of night’s darkness, shall give us light; our songs shall afford us delight, and our wailing, mirth; Apollo, verses and love-conceits, with which we may be eternalised and famous, not only in this present age, but ages to come also.’

‘By ten,’ quoth Sancho, ‘this kind of life is very suitable to my desires, and I believe the bachelor Samson and Master Nicholas the barber will no sooner have seen it but they will turn shepherds with us; and pray God the vicar have not a mind to enter into the sheep-cote too, for he is a merry lad, and jolly.’

‘Thou had said very well, Sancho,’ said Don Quixote, ‘and the bachelor Samson Carrasco, if so be he enter the pastoral lap (as doubtless he will), may call himself the shepherd Samsonino, or Carrascon. Master Nicholas may call himself Niculoso, as the ancient Boscan1 called himself Nemoroso. I know not what name we should bestow upon the vicar, except it were some derivative from his own, calling him the shepherd Curiambro. The shepherdesses on whom we must be enamoured, we may choose their names as amongst peers; and since my lady’s name serves as well for a shepherdess as for a princess, I need not trouble myself to get her another better, give thou thine what name thou wilt.’

‘Mine,’ said Sancho, ‘shall have no other name but Teresona, which will fit her fatness well, and it is taken from her Christian name, which is Teresa; and the rather I celebrating her in my verses, do discover my chaste thoughts, since I seek not in other men’s houses better bread than is made of wheat; ‘twere not fit that the vicar had his shepherdess, to give good example, but if the bachelor will have any, ‘tis in his own free choice.’

‘Lord bless me, Sancho,’ said Don Quixote,’ what a life shall we have on’t! What a world of hornpipes, and Zamora bagpipes shall we hear! What tabouring shall we have! What jangling of bells, and playing on the rebeck! And if to these different musics we have the albogue too, we shall have all kind of pastoral instruments.’

‘What is albogue?’ quoth Sancho. ‘It is,’ said Don Quixote, ‘a certain plate made like a candlestick; and being hollow, gives, if not a very pleasing or harmonious sound, yet it displeaseth not altogether, and agrees well with the rustic tabor and bagpipe; and this word albogue is Moorish, as all those in our Castilian tongue are that begin with Al, to wit, Almoasa, Almorzar, Alhombra, Alguazil, Aluzema, Almazen, Alcancia, and the like, with some few more; and our language hath only three Moorish words that end in i, which are Borcegui, Zaguiçami, and Maravedi; Alheli and Alfaqui are as well known to be Arabic by their beginning with Al as their ending in i. This I have told thee by the way, the word albogue having brought it into my head; and one main help we shall have for the perfection of this calling, that I, thou knowest, am somewhat poetical, and the bachelor Samson Carrasco is a most exquisite one; for the vicar I say nothing, but I lay a wager he hath his smack, and so hath Master Nicholas too; for all these, or the most of them, play upon a gittern, and are rhymers. I will complain of absence, thou shalt praise thyself for a constant lover, the shepherd Carrascon shall mourn for being disdained, and let the vicar Curiambro do what he pleaseth, and so there is no more to be desired.’

To which said Sancho, ‘Sir, I am so unlucky that I fear I shall not see the day in which I may see myself in that happy life. Oh, what neat spoons shall I make when I am shepherd! What hodge-potches and cream! what garlands and other pastoral trumperies! that though they get me not a fame of being wise, yet they shall that I am witty. My little daughter Sanchica shall bring our dinner to the flock; but soft, she is handsome, and you have shepherds more knaves than fools, and I would not have her come for wool, and return shorn: and your loose desires are as incident to the fields as to cities, and as well in shepherds’ cottages as princes’ palaces; and the cause being removed, the sin will be saved, and the heart dreams not of what the eye sees not, and better a fair pair of heels than die at the gallows.’

‘No more proverbs, Sancho,’ said Don Quixote, ‘since each of these is enough to make us know thy meaning; and I have often advised thee not to be so prodigal of thy proverbs, but more sparing; but ‘tis in vain to bid thee, for the more thou art bid, the more thou wilt do it.’

‘Methinks, sir,’ said Sancho, ‘you are like what is said that the frying-pan said to the kettle, “Avaunt, black- brows”; you reprehend me for speaking of proverbs, and you thread up yours by two and two.’

‘Look you, Sancho,’ quoth Don Quixote, ‘I use mine to purpose, and when I speak them, they fit as well as a little ring to the finger; but thou bringest in thine so by head and shoulders that thou rather draggest than guidest them; and, if I forget not, I told thee heretofore, that proverbs are brief sentences, drawn from the experience and speculation of our ancient sages, and a proverb ill applied is rather a foppery than a sentence; but leave we this now, and, since night comes on us, let’s retire a little out of the highway, where we will pass this night, and God knows what may befal us to-morrow.’

So they retired, and made a short supper, much against Sancho’s will, who now began to think of the hard life of knight-errantry in woods and mountains, especially calling to his remembrance the castles and houses as well of Don Diego de Miranda, and where the rich Camacho’s marriage was, and likewise Don Antonio Moreno’s; but he considered with himself that nothing could last ever; and so he slept away the rest of that night, which his master passed watching.
 

        1 Alluding to the word ‘bosque’ for a wood.

